# Zero Inflated Poisson lognormal model

Fit the multivariate Zero Inflated Poisson lognormal model with a
variational algorithm. Use the (g)lm syntax for model specification
(covariates, offsets, subset).

## Usage

``` r
ZIPLN(
  formula,
  data,
  subset,
  zi = c("single", "row", "col"),
  control = ZIPLN_param()
)
```

## Arguments

- formula:

  an object of class "formula": a symbolic description of the model to
  be fitted.

- data:

  an optional data frame, list or environment (or object coercible by
  as.data.frame to a data frame) containing the variables in the model.
  If not found in data, the variables are taken from
  environment(formula), typically the environment from which the model
  is called.

- subset:

  an optional vector specifying a subset of observations to be used in
  the fitting process.

- zi:

  a character describing the model used for zero inflation, either of

  - "single" (default, one parameter shared by all counts)

  - "col" (one parameter per variable / feature)

  - "row" (one parameter per sample / individual). If covariates are
    specified in the formula RHS (see details) this parameter is
    ignored.

- control:

  a list-like structure for controlling the optimization, with default
  generated by
  [`ZIPLN_param()`](https://pln-team.github.io/PLNmodels/reference/ZIPLN_param.md).
  See the associated documentation for details.

## Value

an R6 object with class
[`ZIPLNfit`](https://pln-team.github.io/PLNmodels/reference/ZIPLNfit.md)

## Details

Covariates for the Zero-Inflation parameter (using a logistic regression
model) can be specified in the formula RHS using the pipe
(`~ PLN effect | ZI effect`) to separate covariates for the PLN part of
the model from those for the Zero-Inflation part. Note that different
covariates can be used for each part.

## See also

The class
[`ZIPLNfit`](https://pln-team.github.io/PLNmodels/reference/ZIPLNfit.md)

## Examples

``` r
data(trichoptera)
trichoptera <- prepare_data(trichoptera$Abundance, trichoptera$Covariate)
## Use different models for zero-inflation...
myZIPLN_single <- ZIPLN(Abundance ~ 1, data = trichoptera, zi = "single")
#> 
#>  Initialization...
#>  Adjusting a ZI-PLN model with full covariance model and single specific parameter(s) in Zero inflation component.
#>  DONE!
if (FALSE) { # \dontrun{
myZIPLN_row    <- ZIPLN(Abundance ~ 1, data = trichoptera, zi = "row")
myZIPLN_col    <- ZIPLN(Abundance ~ 1, data = trichoptera, zi = "col")
## ...including logistic regression on covariates
myZIPLN_covar  <- ZIPLN(Abundance ~ 1 | 1 + Wind, data = trichoptera)
} # }
```
